---
layout: post
title: My Case Against Null
published: false
---

<!-- excerpt-begin -->
In an offhand comment to a friend today, while wading through a stack of `NullPointerExceptions`, I cursed the creater of the null pointer.  The friend challenged my complaints, asking if my frustrations were truly caused by `null` itself, or by bad coding practices.  I stumbled for several minutes, picking at pieces of countless blog posts, academic papers, and alternative implementations, and found myself unable to put together a cohesive argument.

Well, here we go.
<!-- excerpt-end -->

## All nothings are not equal

First, let's define what `null` we're talking about: the null pointer.  In languages that support it, the null pointer typically has a value reserved for indicating that whatever pointer variable it's assigned to does not refer to a valid memory location.  This means that any reference type, that is any type that is referred to through a pointer, can either point to a value of that type or to the reserved `null` value.

## Misuse and abuse

My friend's initial counter argument was that many of my complaints were likely due to other programmers mis-using `null`.  Let's look at an example of this:

{% highlight java linenos %}
public class Person {
     private String firstName;
     private String lastName
     
     public NullThingy(String firstName, String lastName){
         this.firstName = firstName;
         this.lastName = lastName;
     }
     
     public void setFirstName(String firstName){
         this.firstName = firstName;
     }
     
     public String getFirstName(){
         return thingy;
     }
     
     public String getFullName(){
         return firstName + " " + lastName;
     }
 }
{% endhighlight %}

A pretty basic, contrived example.  A person has two name parts, a first name, and a last name


This means that before we use _any_ reference value in the system, we must first check to ensure it's not null or ensure that the subsequent code knows how to correctly handle null values.

